I think it's very important to point out that this is a museum.
that we're in, this part here, as a museum.
This is not a library, per se, and I think we should take this all in the context of what it is.
Do you think that's an important distinction?
No, and this has always been the problem of which are we, what are we, and we're not just libraries.
And Dobie left this little ranch house, Paisano.
Interesting, she called his ranch Paisano and said,
to the university for six months fellowship.
If you created anyone, you could be a composer, a potter, a weaver, a writer, and go for six months and leave and go to college.
That's wonderful.
That's what it is.
Well, why not?
Look at this.
And this is Rosa Bonheur, if you can believe it, 19th century plan.
But somebody gave it to Dobie's cousin.
No.
I finally learned the difference.
That is Dobie's chair, the little swivel.
Uh-huh.
That is a very particular kind called a TV horn chair.
which people made because they had no wood.
This is the Caldwell Collection.
There's probably a first edition of every rest of the book that's been written.
Really?
Between the two.
The Caldwell Collection is primarily all the records of the Texas counties and encyclopedic information about Texas.
Y'all did everything he made Western media to expect me.
Before W, all he had was right with me.
L-A-R-O-C-3-E-Tinker, T-A-N-K-E-F Library.
He was a packet boat captain, he was an attorney, went to El Paso.
A packet boat captain, huh?
He went to, lived in El Paso just when Poncho Villa was marching on the parade.
He got on his horse, he rode across the river, he lived in Poncho Villa for three weeks.
He was going in the Bide he loved for, Gouchos, the Carols, and the Calvary.
And the rest of his lives, collecting his materials.
He bought 28 saddles at the William Randolph Hearst, Rose Bay.
Oh.
Okay.
There are seven books in Spanish, seven in French.
These are his books?
Many.
If you have anybody who wants to discover an untranslated Spanish document.
It's here.
The formal curator sent years trans-dropping with a bunch of his letters, and the family did not laugh.
Hmm.
Do we have any Pancho Villa stuff here?
All his letters.
We have all Pancho Villa's letters.
I don't know whether they're all of them or not, but she spent years doing that.
But the originals are here?
The originals, yes.
She bought them.
I'm sure Pancho Villa needed money.
That's why I came to El Paso.
It's not easy to run a revolution.
We have a film of the most beautiful black horse and Brazilian man doing their size together in Covet Garden, London, on this side.
And most of these are of 1885 to early 1900s.
A lot of the silver accents, this one is Latin American.
Okay, we're on.
Maybe you can just quickly identify yourself for the sake of the tape.
I'm Mike Weil, and my academic background is in history.
And I am associate director of the Ransom Center.
I moved here in late May, just last year.
So I'm still kind of finding my way around.
Much of what Connie and I are doing for this book that I'm writing, of course, is on the formation of this great library.
I don't know how much of that you can speak to, but I guess you can tell us a little bit about what you're doing.
Go ahead.
Three or four tasks that don't seem to be very much related.
One is to try to raise money from private foundations and governmental agencies.
HRC in typical Texas fashion, never had to worry about that, and so on, we're that good at it.
And it will not be, in the long run, hard to get good at it because of the resources that you have.
You either have the collections or you don't, and you do.
So that's one concern, and clearly we're going to have to get into that in a big way, and indeed already have submitted a lot of proposals and a lot of things off the ground.
Okay, so you're giving me a question after that.
From the beginning, when Dr. Lanson's vision was articulated to the regions and to the people, money was never apparently any problem.
Not compared to any other university in the country.
How about now?
Oh, we're not poor.
I'd say our acquisitions budget is still very strong compared almost anywhere.
It's kind of hard to siphon that out because nobody is actually willing to mention hard figures very often.
But still, I don't think we're poor at all, but we clearly are not throwing money around.
I don't mean to back you into a point, but you bring figures of $2 million a year.
Are you at that level?
No, I'm close.
Far lower now.
There was a time when we were above it.
About $2 million.
How high or how far was that?
Significantly.
Do you mean that might have changed?
I actually don't have a clear sense of when the money ran out, but I mean, you're talking perhaps a better part of a decade ago, certainly really mid-80s, when the oil boom collapsed.
So it's definitely connected.
Oh, sure, sure, of course.
So now, all of a sudden, you have to go out and...
Well, that's right.
And we should have been doing it all along.
The HRC has a track record of acquiring marvelous collections and not taking as much care of them as we really ought to.
And we know that.
I mean, I don't think that's the secret.
I think we've done well with the resources we have in terms of cataloging and making materials available to the scholars.
But we have a lot of materials that either need more work or that
that have seen the sessions drifting over the years where we're not quite as clear as we ought to be.
We ought to be on national utilities, and we're not.
Oh, either Arlen or OCLC, so that a scholar at Princeton or UCLA can easily find out what we've got in our collections.
No, there's a database that people can collect.
National database is one way of looking at it.
Yeah, we're not on one yet, although we will be within the year.
There was a tendency, in short,
not to digest the acquisitions as thoroughly as a smaller library with less ambitious goals probably could do.
And in a way, I'm sympathetic to the problems the Ransom Center had.
There is no right time to acquire anything.
I mean, you acquire it when you have the money and when it's available.
Those are the parameters, not whether it's convenient for you or whether you have the catalogers
to pick it up online immediately.
But one thing that's kind of exciting about HRC, historically, is it was acquired when they worried about the money.
I mean, they knew the money would be there.
And if the time of the amendment was, get it.
Get it while it's there.
That's correct, yes.
I mean, what I'm saying is— Ransom, particularly, I think that was his philosophy.
And yet it was just true as well of the other directors who preceded Tom, near as I can gather.
And to a degree, it still is.
I mean, if we came up with a really wowser collection, I think you would go over and talk to them.
Well, I wouldn't say that.
I mean, that's presumptive.
But we would go over to the president and say, you know, how serious are you about being really great?
And if you are, this is, we've got to have this collection.
And he would listen.
And that happened in...
Yeah.
Is it going to be an example?
No, but it's happened.
I think Texans are willing to back up their ambitions with money, and that's really what you're talking about.
I think in terms of quotations, I see that one right there.
That's a good one.
Are you Texan?
No, I'm not.
I was born and raised and educated in New England.
In Maine, mostly.
Where did you go to school?
I went to Bates.
Oh, did you?
I went to Bowdoin.
Right here.
Sixty-three.
Sixty-five.
You're a young kid.
What are you now?
Those are very wicked.
Oh, terrible.
There's no such thing as a good one.
My nephew and his wife live in Thompson, which is across the
They got 28 inches of snow in 24 hours the other day.
And I said, this is wonderful.
I don't ever want to see snow again.
I go up for Christmas.
We had that storm as rain.
Yeah.
So you trained as?
As an historian.
Right.
Where I became acquainted with Tom was that we were in administration together in Tulsa.
He was dean.
I was associate dean.
And he was provost.
I was vice provost.
And so I got a chance to move down to a university about 10 times as I've developed.
And I think it's a good thing to change jobs once in a while.
And this is certainly a change of being in the classroom.
And it's intriguing.
I mean, you never know what you're going to run into.
There are just all sorts of things.
What do you mean by that?
Oh, there are three or four punchlines I've developed over the months.
They have a big Harry Houdini collection, of course, and the punchline on that is that it's always disappearing.
No one can never find it.
Actually, it isn't disappearing.
It's around.
Is that Houdini's collection of artifacts or books?
I think he was quite a great collector.
Yes.
Both, I believe.
But there are some artifacts.
I've never bothered to really get into it, so I don't know.
It's funny because one of the collectors I'll be interviewing is the magician Ricky Jay.
Have you ever heard of him again?
But apparently he has
I mean, there may be other collections, but we're supposed to have a big one.
And it took me a while, and as somebody trained in pretty traditional ways, it took me for a while, first of all, to break through the book.
psychology, which is relatively easy, and then manuscripts, so that's okay, that's easy too.
Most people associate libraries with books, to the exclusion of other impressive movements, and clearly in the HRC manuscripts.
Sure.
Well, that's right.
But it takes a while to observe the fact that, or to conclude, based on our
that way about the hrc scholars do and this is a primary resource facility yes we come here to do primary research right right and i think when people suggest that you know i don't know what the percentage is that are catalogued they don't understand but you're dealing with stuff that's really coming in raw
It is not.
Even the books are not easy.
It takes a considerable length of time to catalog a rare book.
And manuscripts could be even trickier.
The Selznick collection here is the biggest, and I suppose it's the most famous example.
But there are others in my picture.
Example of what?
Just something by the sheer size of it being baffling even the professional catalog.
Selznick's 6,000 linear feet.
Some presidents haven't left that much.
And he kept everything.
And that's wonderful for people who are doing research.
But nonetheless, yeah.
Well, it is.
Yes, it is.
It's kind of like the box level now and will be by the end of the file level by the end of the year.
And it's a tremendous corpus of material.
And yet, the average person, the average academic could not begin to put it in a manageable shape.
You have to begin to train darkness.
And you have to have the electronic tools to be able to do it.
You cannot do it with paper.
It's too big.
Is this kind of what you're working on in addition to the money?
Yeah, I'm very interested in automation, the general subject of automation.
I think it's important for HRC.
It's important for us to manage what we do in the community, what we do to the scholarly world.
So yeah, that is another major concern of mine.
And manuscripts are as well, because we tended to be slow in cataloging them, right, just because of the sheer size of holdings.
And we hired a new head of the manuscripts department, and she's very bright.
She's going to be good.
And so I think we're going to turn that around quickly.
Yet I know from using manuscripts as a scholar that an incompletely
performed cataloging is worse than none in some ways.
In other words, it has to be properly done.
It has to be useful.
And that's something I think we get good service on.
I think what we do is, on the whole, is done well.
But there is still much to do.
And there are still plenty of acquisitions coming in the door.
I mean, it's not like we've stopped buying at all.
And that gets to be a question we have to
constantly investigate our priorities.
What is at the top of the list to be done next?
And do we revise that?
And that has not been the psychology.
The psychology was essentially, since we have a lot of money, we don't really have to worry about prioritizing.
It's just not part of our scene.
We therefore would continue to be concerned about acquiring, rather than the emphasis of other business.
not naming me cataloging and getting me available for scholars.
Now, you're not from Texas?
No.
You can't be at Tulsa.
We're in New England, by the way, in your family?
My mother lives in Kennewell, in Maine.
Oh, so you are?
And I grew up in Waterloo, yeah.
Well, you should have gone.
You can go to Colby.
My dad worked at Colby.
He's the superintendent of the Lins and Grands There.
So I know that I live on that campus and know it well, but no.
Well, my point is you're a New England guy, and you just
came to Texas nine months ago.
I know you were in charge of going out and developing a government.
Oh, the National Foundation is a governmental agency in Texas.
The University of Texas at Austin is, you know, it speaks for itself.
I don't think they get a name any more than that.
I mean, it's... Are you dealing with individuals, like private kind of things?
Less that than governmental agencies at this stage, although we've done some of that.
We will do that eventually.
Yeah.
We're...
I think it's necessary, particularly to get lines on people who are interested in certain subjects where we might be acquiring in a few years.
And obviously, we're going to need some private help to do that, as we have always had.
This operation, as someone may have explained to you along the way, is not funded simply on state lines.
In fact, that in terms of annual appropriations from the legislature is one of the rather less significant issues.
Have you been to many of the great
in the United States?
As a working scholar, I suppose I've been to most of them.
I'm trying to think.
I've been on Stanford's campus, but never to the library.
Huntington, Bancroft, Newbury, Harvard, Yale, Princeton.
Sure.
So what's your reaction to that?
How did this place stand apart in your mind?
Yes, it's more diverse in its holdings.
It acquired all of its holdings relatively recently, which is not true for most of those libraries.
It is decidedly a 20th century repository for appropriate reasons, I think.
In some respects, it's pretty much like any other place.
I think perhaps one of the separating characteristics beyond the diversity is simply that the expertise of the HRC is actually split in many areas.
I mean, photography is very good, and books and manuscripts, and even the artwork you saw.
I mean, here's some important pieces over there.
It's simply more diverse than you would expect most places to be.
It's more similar to the Huntington, perhaps, than any other cinema or Newburgh.
Well, I think maybe that the...
The scheme of acquisition parallels in many ways what Huntington did.
Huntington put his library together in seven or eight years.
People don't realize that.
He decided to buy, and it was unblocked.
The phrase on the block came in to Huntington.
Maybe that had something to do with it.
Well, Ransom had a genius in understanding that it was important to collect for this century.
If you're going to collect
like Civil War materials don't bother there.
I mean, the good stuff's gone, right?
And unless somebody's putting it in their basement, there isn't going to be any more, at least with a few rare exceptions.
But 20th century, on the other hand, is an entirely different pursuit.
And if there's a danger out there, and I'm not sure there is, the danger is that the HRC will become the great monument of the first half of 20th century letters and not the whole century.
I think actually we're doing pretty well in terms of protecting ourselves in that way, but
It's an inevitable problem.
Your strength is whenever you had the bucks and whenever you were acquiring rapidly, obviously, as opposed to just the whole scale of the century.
And you don't know who's going to be good.
We have authors who have totally faded from prominence.
Who are important ones?
Joseph Hergesheim.
Everybody was talking about Hergesheim.
When I came here, I didn't know who the hell he was.
I've run into him at Mankin or the editor, and this is news to me.
Right.
Well, I read Mankin's diary a few weeks ago, and he keeps referring to Hergesheim who drinks too much.
Well, Mankin said that about everybody, but he's excluding himself.
But, I mean, we have all the Hergesheimer stuff.
No one knows who the hell he is now.
So what's incredible about Hergesheim?
I don't know.
I'm waiting for you to tell me.
I mean, I'm sure there is some value because of the correspondence, which was extensive with a lot of players, like Macon and Connaught.
You never know them, do you?
No, you don't.
I mean, Melville was totally ignored up until they rediscovered Billy Budd in 1922.
Melville was a nothing author for 40 or 50 years.
Yeah, you read anybody trained in literature
up through the mid-twenties, Melville doesn't look at all.
You don't even see his name.
It's not even on the cringes.
Unbelievable.
I've seen some books that are catalogues of, because I would collect them in a small way, but I've looked at these books that catalogued Great American Art, and this book would be published like 1910.
Pre-Civil War, Cesar, it's always two years.
There's a one solo in there, which is down here as far as the eruption, Whittier, but they've got
these lists had him, they didn't even mention Paul Miller, the author of The Great American Love.
You want to see stories before the Civil War, it's always two years before the mass.
That's right.
My point is an archive like that, we know.
It is a document of the 20th century, and at some point, it's here.
You don't know, and what's ironic about that is that even when you judge yourself to be correct or wrong,
It's totally incorrect, the one either up or down.
Or maybe it's not your job to judge reputation as much as it is considered an archive.
I think that's right.
I think you can get to the point where you second-guess yourself into the ground.
And that's certainly not my concern to do that.
I have other things I worry about here at the HRC.
What I think you can do is to be alive to certain aspects in the humanities that are clearly going to
are clearly going to call on more attention as the years go by.
I think the film, notably, in that regard.
It's just going to continue to be important.
There are some other things that we don't collect that likewise come to mind, the history of sports.
Oh, we do, but apparently it's pretty erratic.
I'm interested in it personally.
Psychology is always strange because the library is not a stockbroker.
In other words, we don't buy because we think something is going to be valuable, in quotation marks, in the sense of money, so much as we do that we think it might have some importance culturally.
That's an entirely different standard of mission.
Everybody says, isn't X, Y, or Z valuable?
Well, yeah, I guess it is.
If you took it out in the market, but the point is we don't take it out in the market.
Once it comes in these doors, it stays here with very rare exceptions.
Do you do deaccession stuff?
Duplicates.
The stacks, I don't know if anybody's walked you through the stacks.
They're an incredible place to walk through.
The first day I was here, I'll never forget this experience, go through.
I don't remember what four of it was, I guess six.
There were three two-volume sets of James Bryce, the American Commonwealth, and they all look splendid.
They look like they just arrived from Kanaka randomly.
They're just in beautiful physical shape, so I think it's an admirable book, and take me down.
And they've saved all three sets because they're autographed.
You know, he signed the mark to somebody or other, and they probably drifted in here because of three separate collections, and
And somebody had the wit to say correctly, well, those we keep.
And yeah, we do a session, but we're careful about it.
There are state laws that are, I think, properly conservative on the subject, and so we're careful about it.
And very rarely will be a session anything with any value.
And we're talking duplicates, triplicates, quadruplicates.
You have sound books in 2030.
Yeah.
Yes.
I think we may be the world's greatest warehouse on Kipling and some of those other things.
And some things are unpredictable.
The American Serves editions of World War II, the books that the GIs carried around, they have almost a complete run of them.
I think the LC is the only one that does have a complete run.
And they drifted in here.
I mean, by any reasonable definition of the humanities, it's an odd collection to have, but nonetheless, there it is, and it's valuable.
It's interesting.
It is interesting.
In fact, you can see what they charge, you know, their books.
I know, but, you know, I had a particular blocking book that they published only in this armed forces with the butter.
Yeah.
They're small out of paper shortage.
They did.
They made it.
presses and they tell them in half.
And we have a World War II exhibit up on the fourth floor right now.
Students look at those, you tell them, this is really the beginning of the paperback revolution in the United States.
Students just look at them like they're from Mars or something like that.
I mean, they're attentive to them, but they still look at them in the most peculiar way.
And a lot of times you have books that
that are interesting and curiosities, but also fulfill a scholarly function of importance.
For example, we have several collectors' libraries, Alfred Knopf.
Well, I mean, this is all the stuff he published, and a lot else besides, it's all inscribed to him by the authors.
So, I mean, it's... That's his personal library.
Yeah, and J. Frank Dovey, the same thing over in the FAC.
Dobie was enough of a Texan, enough of a character, and yet at the same time enough of a national figure that these two, I think, merits some attention.
And you pick up those books and he made an evaluation.
Most of them, so-and-so is a bastard, or so-and-so writes superbly, or whatever he felt he wrote it.
And I don't think Knopf did that.
At least I haven't read anybody.
Typically it's a little bit more discreet.
Well, did I miss anything, did you think?
Did I miss anything, did you think?
Well, I think, you know, it's impossible in a brief amount of time to know what you've seen.
As I said, the theme of the place is the diversity, and the fact that the impressive thing to me is that Texas is serious about making the HRC a distinguished place for the long run, and have been good on that intention.
And we'll continue to do so.
It's just a marvelous place.
Well, as I've mentioned already, I found it amusing to encourage some of the British accents around here.
Yeah.
Because this is where I want to study certain areas.
It's far better than any place in England, sure.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
And incidentally, the French holdings are very strong as well.
Exactly, probably.
Yeah, Beckett.
Very strong.
And the U.S.
holdings are strong as well.
For the North Atlantic, the whole issue of North Atlantic culture is where you start without question.
Without question in the 20th century.
And the photographic archives is the largest in the university in the world.
It's just huge.
Five million.
Yeah, yeah.
That's almost, you know, that's mind-boggling.
Five million.
Yeah, it is.
It is.
Try thinking about cataloging that.
It's being done, right?
Yes.
And parts of it have been catalogued quite well.
We're trying to figure out how to get it on our CD-ROM so we can have patron access and staff access in terms of many fields of information, of the media, of the print or negative we've done in, and the subject matter.
Everything's going to be under database, so the computer's all.
eventually it takes time because the cataloging is immense but yes yeah it's got to be on the computer it's the only way it can be managed really paper does not work for a lot of my archival stuff at harvard i can't believe how easy it is
We get into that game very late, but nonetheless, I think there's some advantage to that.
I mean, except for obvious stuff.
in accordance with whatever the state policies are, you handle it that way.
I have no interest in warehousing for it.
But on the other hand, no, I don't ever see deaccession as being very active.
I don't think it is an answer to this.
Do you have other state guidelines that I had heard?
This was thoroughly unvaccinated source.
I was just chatting with somebody long before I got here.
But if you wanted to sell anything anywhere, that you have to use the same, apply the same laws and standards, say, as the highway department might, if they wanted to sell off some old trackers?
That might get three bids or something like that?
That's wider the market.
It's not that unreasonable.
They know they're dealing with books as opposed to used trucks.
But the key thing, and this is important for HRC quite out of the context of the state bureaucracy, the key thing
to get the material in the first place.
Did it come in as a gift?
Did it come in as a session by a regular state budgetary channel?
Did it come in through the permanent university finals as a sort of endowment?
The source of the gift, in other words, makes some difference in terms of the way you can deaccession it.
But the state's view is quite properly concerned that the deaccession you handle
And so what that means practically, apparently, as we can figure out, and I want to label it, the fact that we have not done much, and we do intend to do something in the near future.
But what that means practically is that your best bet, in most instances, is to auction an auction.
I mean, to have a third-party auction for you.
Sign at the South of East and Christie's.
Yeah, maybe not those two, but still, yeah.
And the state seems to have no huge trouble with that.
But as you've already pointed out, that's not a really relevant issue because you haven't sold anything.
Haven't sold?
No, not enough to worry.
Inter-system transfers are much easier.
For example, the University of Texas at Arlington has done some duplicates and so forth.
And that's easier, but there's no serious money there.
Well, I mean, let's say you have 40, I don't know what the number is, but you have 40 copies of Ulysses, and the only price went to $20,000.
You know, that could generally seem familiar.
Oh, yeah, but I mean, speaking theoretically, I don't think you sold one at a time.
Well, I was going to say, you don't want to flood the market either.
Right, sure.
You know, Tamerlane, the one that Dick Manning bought last year, paid $198,000 for it.
It was $88,000.
88.
Now, the other one, the guy from California, just paid $150.
That was the second one in a year and a half, and Dick Mandy was out of the picture.
And I think the same thing would happen if you all of a sudden were to... This is from Texas.
Well, it's still Texas, and this is going to be the second biggest state after the census next year.
I mean, this is not in Oklahoma.
The thinking about this is simply different from a state that large, and the economy fundamentally quite healthy, even if it's still digging out of some aspects of the world.
No, very little.
Very little.
I don't have a handle on that, because the arts and sciences generally have done very poorly in that area here in Texas, not because they couldn't do well.
I think they did quite well, but they've done a lot of different things.
And yet, some other areas, the universities, the engineering and hard science areas, the federal funding is enormously successful.
Yeah, that's the issue.
That's the issue, too.
It's not Texans, for the contrary.
It's not that anybody ended up dealing with ideological prejudices.
It's just that people had a part to do it.
And we'll do it.
We'll be successful, because we've got a lot of work here to be done on collections of international courts.
So I'm very optimistic.
What would be the sort of average number of years that a great collection is gathered over, I mean, we look back, I mean, we think of Harvard, of course, and they've gotten bits and pieces over a very long period of time.
But Huntington first.
Seven years.
I just mentioned Huntington and Mike.
He was comparing your collection and kind of focused with Huntington.
I said, that's interesting because Huntington also, I mean, the phrase en bloc comes in with Huntington's entire library.
What's the price?
They would be consigned.
It's a million dollar offer.
That's how he did it.
and daddy i mean they're uh yeah now they're collecting manuscripts and archives they're doing that same kind of thing it's interesting i hadn't thought of it there is one constant is obviously you can't do something unless you're blessed with and those come and go money and i guess when we start with texas we have to start with the fact that
Harry Ransom's vision was energized by the fact that he came along at a time and there was a lot of money available, thankfully, and generous benefactors.
And they gave him the mandate to go and do it.
And kind of an untapped potential for philanthropy.
There were many wealthy people who had not yet acted in that tradition.
But, of course, I believe
It's hard to know that the vast amount of that money came directly from the Board of Regents.
It was not necessarily private donations.
I don't know how much was and how much was.
I found a 1973 New York Times piece, which is interesting.
In 1973, that's the first reference I could find to Harry Ransom's first profile.
There may be others, but that's the first one I could find in the Times Index.
But after 15 years, the Times recognized that the collection, they ranked it with Harvard, and Yale, and the public library.
When did the Hobson book come out?
73.
Oh, I've got one right down there.
Oh, you mean for yourself?
Yeah.
Sorry.
That's about 73, 74.
Right around the same time, isn't it?
I guess, Miss Luce, you've been here how long.
Actually, 25 years this year?
Yes, 1990.
So you were here really at the beginning, so to speak.
Well, not quite at the beginning.
A real exciting beginning, I think, was 56, 57, 58.
I came in 65, and of course, as a very low-length library assistant, and so I was just aware of the excitement.
I was here in school also, and as a matter of fact,
was in one, I guess, the last course that I was taught.
I was in what was known as Plan II, and he was a big proponent of Plan II.
It's just an honors program in liberal arts, where you don't really have to major in anything.
It's just a humanities program.
And, as a matter of fact, his wife is also a college.
I knew you were on.
Well, he was exciting.
He really did get people roused about learning in and of itself.
And his influence was very much felt all over the campus when I was in school.
I mean, he had funny little songs about him.
He was so involved.
This was before we had him as a teacher.
And just there really
was a very pervasive sense of you can learn it all, you know, it's all available, it's just here for the tapping.
And of course that was at the time, I graduated in 57, so that was the time things were starting to happen, and he was also bringing these young professors who were well silver,
and Shaddock, and Carol Smith, and on and on and on.
Almost all, if not all, is, you know, gone now.
But they came, I think, to a magic touch, and it was, you know, I mean, even among the undergraduate students, there was definitely a sense of great things that happened to the university.
But when I came back to get a degree in library science,
after I had grown children.
Some of that, I mean, a great deal of that still existed.
But as a teacher, I will have to tell you that, and I would be quoted in this, I don't remember learning any particular thing from him.
It was just a great sense of excitement, of knowledge.
And it was infectious, I guess.
Yes.
Did you work closely with him here when you came to work?
No, he, at that time, of course, he, let's see, I can't remember the exact sequence.
Do you have a little folder on him?
Okay.
But anyway, he went very quickly from the vice, and he was vice president, I believe, from right after I had him for the class.
He taught one semester of the class, that was in the fall, and I married and left, and I was allowed to graduate
by correspondence, which is the most unusual thing, by just writing papers for the second part of that tutorial course.
But he did have, he had Silver and Errol Smith, all these people come in and teach one particular, one week, and someone else teach the next week, and that's how he finished after the year, and then after that I don't believe he taught again at all.
But, what was your original question?
Oh, did I work closely with him?
No.
No, not.
I knew him, and he knew me, but he was very much, I would say, pretty relieved, up in the tower, and with Mrs. Hudsworth kind of protecting him from too much contact with people who wanted things, either faculty or whatever.
Was he really focused, however, on building this HSU?
I mean, this was really his goal.
Oh, definitely.
It was one of them, though.
He was responsible for building the underground for libraries, and I think it was even his vision to build a new general library.
So, and he had a program for excellence which provided funds for all sorts of special projects, seminars, or there was, I think, even a cataloging project in the art department.
His vision was very broad.
I think the HRC would like to think that it was his special love, and I think this block would confirm that that really was the case.
When you read this New York Times piece, for instance, as early as 1973, you find unnamed people from other repositories being met that his unauthorized
What do you suppose they're talking about when you say that?
Well, I think buying on the... and entering the market, I guess, in the way that he did.
I mean, I've always just heard this is when, you know, that he always bought through Feldman, I usually bought through Feldman, and he died from the London Library, say, in 1961.
which was a sale to help benefit the London Library, which was in dire straits, and people contributed to it.
I think that's where we got the enforcer managed to package it, and then there's other things.
We bought practically the whole, everything.
And I don't know that that's particularly unorthodox, but it seemed to miss people, but we were into things in such a big way, came in,
And, of course, any time you've got someone in a market like that, it does drive the price as well.
Well, at the wholesale in 1911, well, nobody had really heard of Henry Hutchinson.
And he took a train east in California.
And he arrived with George G. Smith, his dealer, and sat next to him.
And they knew who he was afterwards.
He paid $50,000 for the .
But J.P.
Morgan .
But he had to settle for the one on paper, the one on vellum went to California.
And they did.
He and Morgan really did go head to head.
Morgan never went personally vellum across the Greenland.
Huntington won out, and just about everything that he wanted, he got.
And I suppose, well, did he drive up the price of the market?
I suppose he did.
That's true, especially if you got several people.
But I think the library today is one of the great libraries in the world, so does that justify it, I guess?
Of course.
Well, I mean, if you are going to build and you want things, I guess you have to decide how far you want to go for those things.
Now, I can't believe that Texas was ever in the bidding to the extent of that time.
I just don't know who our competitors were at the time.
You blew everybody away from doing it.
But what the Getty was doing was all right.
It's not dissimilar.
And they're doing it with manuscripts now, too.
And I have had three people, and I can name them because they're set up to the record now, and you'll know every name.
Nicholas Barker, Roger Starrer, the Houghton Highland, Bob Knight-Christopher, Roger's mother.
And you can almost take this quote and give it to either man, because each man basically said it.
They said, those who accuse the University of Texas of indiscriminate
acquisitions of really expressing self, race.
That's sort of what we've always felt.
I'm glad they said it.
And they said it, and I will quote them to that.
And this is Clark, and this is where I just started at Emilton Library, which, if anything, is an old-line conservative, but they respect what you've done.
So if they lost out, they lost out.
Strange enough, there does seem to be enough to go around.
I wonder how it felt to be here.
Was it a job on the one hand, or was there a sense of enthusiasm, a sense of mission?
Oh, a tremendous sense of mission, a great, great energy.
I guess in the early years when I was as a manuscript cataloger, once I got my degree, but we'd be opening things now.
There were two, I have to explain, there was a division of the library.
It was in the tower four miles until 1963, all these things were in the tower.
And the place was just overflowing with things as these modern materials started coming in.
And we were also getting older things as well, but not in the end of the quantity.
So when the academic center, undergraduate library was built, the fourth floor of the academic center became the quote academic center, and that was part of a lot of what you're seeing in the great libraries.
and the modern materials for author's loans after 1850 were over there.
That was 63.
Then in 1972, we moved almost everything from the academic center, almost everything from the tower over to here, plus things which were stored in the Balcones Research Center and the warehouses and all over, and basements and all over the place.
So there's been kind of a traveling library
And there was an enormous excitement when we were getting handling materials.
And I was in the older part of the library, pre-1850.
I had to find something on a handling line and do that.
That's a great story.
And I did not know that his widow is still alive.
Yes, yes.
Sula.
Well, yes, and you should read The Art of Love and Love of Art, which she wrote.
That's the title of the book.
It's something like that.
Is it published?
Yes.
Oh, yes.
We have, I think, we have a copy here.
I'm sure that that was part of it.
Can we do it once again?
The Art of Love?
It's either The Art of Love and The Love of Art or The Love of Art and The Art of Love.
Her motto was, I aspire to inspire before I expire.
That's wonderful.
I've just been getting this, you know, for people.
I've always wished, I always wished that she would come down here before Ransom died.
I mean, there just couldn't be two more disparate types.
Of course, I think Feldman and Ransom were so different in Ransom.
You know, can you tell me anything about how those two got together at all?
I have no idea what they were doing.
It is of interest, because he almost used Mr. Feldman exclusively.
And there was a grape before and they died within a very short time with one another.
You talk about sour grapes.
There are any number of old wine bookers dealers in New York who say that Goldman had got all the action down.
I wonder why that is.
And you know, his background was so different, I mean it seemed to be so different from Ransom.
It's just really amazing.
He would come down here in his great big sunglasses.
He's distinguished looking.
Tom showed us a photograph of all the old material.
And that's the best picture I'd ever seen.
But I guess he had capital, too.
I guess he could extend that.
Well, he could do that.
And he did.
I mean, that was the way.
So I had to buy at the end because things were getting tight.
and he was spending so very, very much money on materials.
I worked with Ransom just a little bit after we moved over here, and the librarian resigned and some other people who worked with HRC, Dr. Roberts, was coming up to take over the library.
This is all very political.
And so during that end of the summer, whenever there was a problem,
We discussed it with Rain, so his office was then down here.
But then, after that, he got out of the picture probably a lot.
Dr. Robert is here quite a while, isn't he?
Oh, at least.
There was a turner, I guess, was there.
And nobody knows what he gets.
He's in Austin sometimes.
He's kind of interesting.
Well, an unpleasant one as far as I'm concerned, but... Why is that?
I mean, did you describe his arrogance?
Oh, it's very hard to say.
Both insecure and arrogant, the combination that doesn't work very well with people.
He had been put it in the kindest way.
He had been in a one-man show at the Goodwill Library in Dallas, and he had a lot of attention from the Dallas
matrons, and he knew how to take a little old lady and show her around the library and make her feel, you know, that she was a part of this wonderful thing.
But he came from an institution where there may be four or five people in staff at the most to this really large institution, and he had no sense of
He actually used an expression that I've heard, that he didn't want one of the people accused of employing a ransom suit on one of the others.
What was the ransom syndrome?
Well, the ransom syndrome seemed to be gathering too many materials, all of these things.
But he used that phrase, right?
And sometimes, yes, and sometimes he used it as if it were a compliment, as if he was trying to make it sound like a compliment.
Another time he was very disparaging.
Every time I've heard it, it hasn't been very complicated at all.
Well, I think, I mean, I really think he had grave psychological problems as far as Ransom was concerned.
In a way, they were competing.
Under his shadow.
Right.
And he did build this
the theological library into something much finer.
He concentrated on bindings and leaves it up.
And I think he had to raise his own budget a few years.
So he had, obviously the qualities were well suited to the situation he was in.
And I think he really preferred a private institution to be a public one.
He was ill-suited.
Exactly.
Let's put it quite bluntly.
It was not the best choice, I think.
I saw a quote from him right after the book in this paper that this young woman from Berkeley did.
I think she sent a questionnaire to it.
But she quoted, you even have to use up the Poor Simon collection, which would have been a moment for, what's the word I'm looking for?
Jubilation.
Or expression or whatever.
Text him to want something, text him to love and get it.
It's a great quote, I think.
It's not the kind of thing they should have said at that time.
Oh, it would perhaps alienate people just a little more, you know.
Well, we've been involved, or something, during a lot of time, mending those trenches.
It's a very severe situation.
How about Dr. Roberts now?
Did he function well within this system, was he saying that?
Yes.
I think it changed enormously since he was here and in the museum.
administering the library in general, and he was basically a scholar and a teacher with great interest in D. H. Lawrence and so with the D. H. Lawrence collection.
He was a person who, because of the lack of some lack of organization, people were able to kind of grab an area and, you know, make it into something.
have opportunities they might not have had if there was any organization structure.
So, he had both, you know, good qualities and another second.
Are we in my way?
do you have any other questions i can call you uh the telephone makes us a lot closer that's right i want to thank you very much for your time i'm looking forward to you i am too i was just thinking it'd be a good project for one of our interns to look at what we have yeah yeah well he that was a